www/unstable/userguide/localdate-patterns.md, before:

---
layout: userguide
title: Patterns for LocalDate values
category: text
weight: 2060
---

The [`LocalDate`](noda-type://NodaTime.LocalDate) type supports the following patterns:

Standard Patterns
-----------------

The following standard patterns are supported:

- `d`: Short format pattern.  
  This is the short date pattern as defined by the culture's [`DateTimeFormatInfo.ShortDatePattern`](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.globalization.datetimeformatinfo.shortdatepattern.aspx).
  For example, in the invariant culture this is "MM/dd/yyyy".

- `D`: Long format pattern.  
  This is the long date pattern as defined by the culture's [`DateTimeFormatInfo.LongDatePattern`](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.globalization.datetimeformatinfo.longdatepattern.aspx).
  For example, in the invariant culture this is "dddd, dd MMMM yyyy".
  This is the default format pattern.

Custom Patterns
---------------

The following custom format pattern characters are supported for local dates. See [custom pattern notes](text.html#custom-patterns)
for general notes on custom patterns, including characters used for escaping and text literals.

For the meanings of "absolute" years and text handling, see later details.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Character</td>
      <td>Meaning</td>
      <td>Example</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><code>y</code> or <code>yy</code></td>
      <td>
        Two digit absolute year with an optional leading <code>-</code> sign; a single <code>y</code> allows up to two digits to be parsed,
		but formats only one digit where possible. When parsing, the "base century" is chosen from the template
		value; if the two-digit year is greater than 30, the corresponding year in the previous
		century is used. Note that when formatting, no checking
        is performed to ensure that the year will be parsed to
        the same value. (For example, 1725 would be formatted
        as 25 but parsed as 2025.) 
      </td>
      <td>
	    Assuming a template value of 2000 (the default):
        2012: <code>y</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
        2040: <code>y</code> => <code>40</code> - parsing "40" would give a date in 1940 <br />
        2004: <code>y</code> => <code>4</code> <br />
        2004: <code>yy</code> => <code>04</code> <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>yyy</code></td>
      <td>
        Three digit absolute year with optional leading <code>-</code>
        sign. This will parse up to five digits, but only format to as many as are
		required, with a minimum of three.
      </td>
      <td>
	    1984: parsed to 1984, formatted to "1984" <br />
		00123: parsed to year 123, formatted just to "123" <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>yyyy</code></td>
      <td>
        The absolute year as 4 digits with an optional leading <code>-</code> sign.
      </td>
    </tr>
	<tr>
	  <td><code>Y</code>, <code>YY</code>, <code>YYY</code>, <code>YYYY</code>
	  <td>
	    The year of era, zero-padded as necessary to the same number of characters as the number of 'Y' characters.
		See notes below.
      </td>
	  <td>
	    3 B.C.: <code>YYYY</code> => <code>0003</code>
	  </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
	  <td><code>g</code> or <code>gg</code></td>
	  <td>
	    The name of the era. This is calendar and culture specific. See notes below.
	  </td>
	  <td>
	    13 B.C. (ISO calendar, en-US): <code>Y g</code> => <code>13 B.C.</code>
	  </td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>M</code> or <code>MM</code></td>
      <td>
        Month of year specified as a number. <code>MM</code> is zero-padded; <code>M</code> is not.
      </td>
      <td>
	    June: <code>M</code> => <code>6</code> <br />
	    June: <code>MM</code> => <code>06</code> <br />
	    December: <code>M</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
	    December: <code>MM</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>MMM</code></td>
      <td>
	    Abbreviated month name, parsed case-insensitively. This is culture-sensitive.
      </td>
      <td>
	    (In an English locale.) <br />
	    June: <code>MMM</code> => <code>Jun</code> (can parse from "jun" or "JUN" etc.)<br />
	    December: <code>MMM</code> => <code>Dec</code> (can parse from "dec" or "DEC" etc.)<br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>MMMM</code></td>
      <td>
	    Full month name, parsed case-insensitively. This is culture-sensitive.
      </td>
      <td>
	    (In an English locale.) <br />
	    June: <code>MMMM</code> => <code>June</code> (can parse from "june" or "JUNE" etc.)<br />
	    December: <code>MMMM</code> => <code>December</code> (can parse from "december" or "DECEMBER" etc.)<br />
      </td>
    </tr>
	<tr>
      <td><code>d</code> or <code>dd</code></td>
      <td>
        Day of month - <code>dd</code> is zero-padded; <code>d</code> is not.
      </td>
      <td>
	    1st of the month: <code>d</code> => <code>1</code> (would parse "01" as well)<br />
	    1st of the month: <code>dd</code> => <code>01</code><br />
	    21st of the month: <code>d</code> => <code>21</code><br />
	    21st of the month: <code>dd</code> => <code>21</code><br />
      </td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>ddd</code></td>
      <td>
	    Abbreviated day-of-week name, parsed case-insensitively. When parsing, the parsed day of week
		is validated against the computed date, but does not affect the calculations of that date.
		This value is culture-sensitive.
	  </td>
      <td>
	    February 4th 2012 (a Saturday)<br />
		en-US: <code>Sat</code>
		fr-FR: <code>sam.</code>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>dddd</code></td>
      <td>
	    Full day-of-week name, parsed case-insensitively. When parsing, the parsed day of week
		is validated against the computed date, but does not affect the calculations of that date.
      </td>
      <td>
	    February 4th 2012 (a Saturday)<br />
		en-US: <code>Saturday</code>
		fr-FR: <code>samedi</code>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>c</code></td>
      <td>
        The Noda-specific calendar system ID. This would rarely be appropriate
		for user-visible text, but allows exact round-tripping when serializing values via text.
      </td>
      <td><code>ISO</code><br />
	      <code>Coptic 3</code><br />
		  <code>Hijri Astronomical-Base16</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>/</code></td>
      <td>
        The date separator for the format provider; slash in the invariant culture.
      </td>
      <td>en-US: <code>yyyy/MM/dd</code> => <code>2011/10/09</code><br />
          de-DE: <code>yyyy/MM/dd</code> => <code>2011.10.09</code></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
    
</table>

Notes
-----

**Absolute and era years**

Some calendars support multiple eras. For example, the ISO calendar supports the B.C. / B.C.E. and A.D. / C.E. eras.
A mapping is provided between "year within era" and "absolute" year - where an absolute year uniquely identifies the date,
and does not generally skip. In the ISO calendar, the absolute year 0 is deemed to be 1 B.C. and the absolute year 1 is
deemed to be 1 A.D. thus giving a simplified arithmetic system.

Negative absolute years can be both parsed and formatted - so "13 B.C." would be formatted as "-0012" using the "yyyy" format.

**Text sources**

Noda Time comes with its own limited set of era names, but month and day names are taken from the .NET framework.
Unfortunately these are not available on a per-calendar basis, so the same names are used for all calendars, based solely
on culture. It is hoped that future release of Noda Time may use information from the [Unicode CLDR](http://cldr.unicode.org/)
to provide a more comprehensive treatment.

**Hebrew month names**

The Hebrew calendar has two month numbering systems (scriptural and civil), each with their
own benefits and drawbacks. Both have issues for text handling: as of Noda Time 1.3.0, the
civil month numbering is assumed as that corresponds with the BCL month numbering... but due to
the inclusion of a leap month, the month name/number correspondence changes in a leap year.
Until this is fixed, it is strongly recommended that you only use month *numbers* in any textual
representations of dates in the Hebrew calendar. Additionally, you may wish to consider how to
best clarify whether that month number is in the scriptural or civil numbering system.

Commit message:

Remove year-of-century and century-of-era, which behaved weirdly for BC dates and almost certainly weren't right-by-default for various use cases.
There's now no difference between ISO and Gregorian-4, but the distinction
is maintained.

Fixes issue 318.

www/unstable/userguide/localdate-patterns.md, after:

---
layout: userguide
title: Patterns for LocalDate values
category: text
weight: 2060
---

The [`LocalDate`](noda-type://NodaTime.LocalDate) type supports the following patterns:

Standard Patterns
-----------------

The following standard patterns are supported:

- `d`: Short format pattern.  
  This is the short date pattern as defined by the culture's [`DateTimeFormatInfo.ShortDatePattern`](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.globalization.datetimeformatinfo.shortdatepattern.aspx).
  For example, in the invariant culture this is "MM/dd/yyyy".

- `D`: Long format pattern.  
  This is the long date pattern as defined by the culture's [`DateTimeFormatInfo.LongDatePattern`](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.globalization.datetimeformatinfo.longdatepattern.aspx).
  For example, in the invariant culture this is "dddd, dd MMMM yyyy".
  This is the default format pattern.

Custom Patterns
---------------

The following custom format pattern characters are supported for local dates. See [custom pattern notes](text.html#custom-patterns)
for general notes on custom patterns, including characters used for escaping and text literals.

For the meanings of "absolute" years and text handling, see later details.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Character</td>
      <td>Meaning</td>
      <td>Example</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><code>y</code> or <code>yy</code></td>
      <td>
        Two digit absolute year, in the range 0-99; a single <code>y</code> allows up to two digits to be parsed,
        but formats only one digit where possible. When parsing, the "base century" is chosen from the template
        value; if the two-digit year is greater than 30, the corresponding year in the previous century is used.
        Note that when formatting, no checking is performed to ensure that the year will be parsed to
        the same value. (For example, 1725 would be formatted as 25 but parsed as 2025.) Negative absolute years
        are coalesced into 2-digit year numbers in a way which maintains chronological ordering - so for example,
        95BC is absolute -94; that will be formatted as `06`. The following yaear (94BC) is absolute -93; that will be
        formatted as `07`. This is documented for completeness; it is *strongly* recommended that you do not use
        `y` or `yy` with dates which may have negative absolute years.
      </td>
      <td>
	    Assuming a template value of 2000 (the default):
        2012: <code>y</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
        2040: <code>y</code> => <code>40</code> - parsing "40" would give a date in 1940 <br />
        2004: <code>y</code> => <code>4</code> <br />
        2004: <code>yy</code> => <code>04</code> <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>yyy</code></td>
      <td>
        Three digit absolute year with optional leading <code>-</code>
        sign. This will parse up to five digits, but only format to as many as are
		required, with a minimum of three.
      </td>
      <td>
	    1984: parsed to 1984, formatted to "1984" <br />
		00123: parsed to year 123, formatted just to "123" <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>yyyy</code></td>
      <td>
        The absolute year as 4 digits with an optional leading <code>-</code> sign.
      </td>
    </tr>
	<tr>
	  <td><code>Y</code>, <code>YY</code>, <code>YYY</code>, <code>YYYY</code>
	  <td>
	    The year of era, zero-padded as necessary to the same number of characters as the number of 'Y' characters.
		See notes below.
      </td>
	  <td>
	    3 B.C.: <code>YYYY</code> => <code>0003</code>
	  </td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
	  <td><code>g</code> or <code>gg</code></td>
	  <td>
	    The name of the era. This is calendar and culture specific. See notes below.
	  </td>
	  <td>
	    13 B.C. (ISO calendar, en-US): <code>Y g</code> => <code>13 B.C.</code>
	  </td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>M</code> or <code>MM</code></td>
      <td>
        Month of year specified as a number. <code>MM</code> is zero-padded; <code>M</code> is not.
      </td>
      <td>
	    June: <code>M</code> => <code>6</code> <br />
	    June: <code>MM</code> => <code>06</code> <br />
	    December: <code>M</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
	    December: <code>MM</code> => <code>12</code> <br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>MMM</code></td>
      <td>
	    Abbreviated month name, parsed case-insensitively. This is culture-sensitive.
      </td>
      <td>
	    (In an English locale.) <br />
	    June: <code>MMM</code> => <code>Jun</code> (can parse from "jun" or "JUN" etc.)<br />
	    December: <code>MMM</code> => <code>Dec</code> (can parse from "dec" or "DEC" etc.)<br />
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>MMMM</code></td>
      <td>
	    Full month name, parsed case-insensitively. This is culture-sensitive.
      </td>
      <td>
	    (In an English locale.) <br />
	    June: <code>MMMM</code> => <code>June</code> (can parse from "june" or "JUNE" etc.)<br />
	    December: <code>MMMM</code> => <code>December</code> (can parse from "december" or "DECEMBER" etc.)<br />
      </td>
    </tr>
	<tr>
      <td><code>d</code> or <code>dd</code></td>
      <td>
        Day of month - <code>dd</code> is zero-padded; <code>d</code> is not.
      </td>
      <td>
	    1st of the month: <code>d</code> => <code>1</code> (would parse "01" as well)<br />
	    1st of the month: <code>dd</code> => <code>01</code><br />
	    21st of the month: <code>d</code> => <code>21</code><br />
	    21st of the month: <code>dd</code> => <code>21</code><br />
      </td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>ddd</code></td>
      <td>
	    Abbreviated day-of-week name, parsed case-insensitively. When parsing, the parsed day of week
		is validated against the computed date, but does not affect the calculations of that date.
		This value is culture-sensitive.
	  </td>
      <td>
	    February 4th 2012 (a Saturday)<br />
		en-US: <code>Sat</code>
		fr-FR: <code>sam.</code>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>dddd</code></td>
      <td>
	    Full day-of-week name, parsed case-insensitively. When parsing, the parsed day of week
		is validated against the computed date, but does not affect the calculations of that date.
      </td>
      <td>
	    February 4th 2012 (a Saturday)<br />
		en-US: <code>Saturday</code>
		fr-FR: <code>samedi</code>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>c</code></td>
      <td>
        The Noda-specific calendar system ID. This would rarely be appropriate
		for user-visible text, but allows exact round-tripping when serializing values via text.
      </td>
      <td><code>ISO</code><br />
	      <code>Coptic 3</code><br />
		  <code>Hijri Astronomical-Base16</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>/</code></td>
      <td>
        The date separator for the format provider; slash in the invariant culture.
      </td>
      <td>en-US: <code>yyyy/MM/dd</code> => <code>2011/10/09</code><br />
          de-DE: <code>yyyy/MM/dd</code> => <code>2011.10.09</code></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
    
</table>

Notes
-----

**Absolute and era years**

Some calendars support multiple eras. For example, the ISO calendar supports the B.C. / B.C.E. and A.D. / C.E. eras.
A mapping is provided between "year within era" and "absolute" year - where an absolute year uniquely identifies the date,
and does not generally skip. In the ISO calendar, the absolute year 0 is deemed to be 1 B.C. and the absolute year 1 is
deemed to be 1 A.D. thus giving a simplified arithmetic system.

Negative absolute years can be both parsed and formatted - so "13 B.C." would be formatted as "-0012" using the "yyyy" format.

**Text sources**

Noda Time comes with its own limited set of era names, but month and day names are taken from the .NET framework.
Unfortunately these are not available on a per-calendar basis, so the same names are used for all calendars, based solely
on culture. It is hoped that future release of Noda Time may use information from the [Unicode CLDR](http://cldr.unicode.org/)
to provide a more comprehensive treatment.

**Hebrew month names**

The Hebrew calendar has two month numbering systems (scriptural and civil), each with their
own benefits and drawbacks. Both have issues for text handling: as of Noda Time 1.3.0, the
civil month numbering is assumed as that corresponds with the BCL month numbering... but due to
the inclusion of a leap month, the month name/number correspondence changes in a leap year.
Until this is fixed, it is strongly recommended that you only use month *numbers* in any textual
representations of dates in the Hebrew calendar. Additionally, you may wish to consider how to
best clarify whether that month number is in the scriptural or civil numbering system.
