www/unstable/userguide/versions.md, before:

---
layout: userguide
title: Version history
category: library
weight: 170
---

User-visible changes from 1.0.0-beta1 onwards. See the
[project repository](http://code.google.com/p/noda-time/source/list) for more
details.

## 1.2 (current default branch)

Major features:

- XML serialization

API changes:

- ...

Newly-obsolete members:

- ...

API changes for NodaTime.Testing:

- ...

Bug fixes:

- ...

Other:

## 1.1.0, released 2013-04-06 with tzdb 2013b

API changes:

- Added `OffsetDateTime.Comparer` and `ZonedDateTime.Comparer`,
  `IComparer<T>` implementations that compare values by either the local
  date/time or the underlying instant
- `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.WindowsZones` renamed to `WindowsMapping`
- `ZoneEqualityComparer` converted to use factory methods rather than
  multiple constructors; some options' names changed

## 1.1.0-rc1, released 2013-03-28 with tzdb 2013b

Major features:

- Noda Time assemblies are now also available in Portable Class Library
  versions (see the [installation instructions](installation.html) for details)
- Noda Time now uses a self-contained (and more compact) format for storing
  TZDB data that is not directly tied to .NET resources; the old format was
  not supportable in the PCL build

API changes:

- The new `DateTimeZone.GetZoneIntervals` methods return a sequence of zone
  intervals which cover a particular interval ([issue 172][])
- A new `ZoneEqualityComparer` class allows time zones to be compared for
  equality with varying degrees of strictness, over a given interval
- `LocalDate`, `LocalTime`, `LocalDateTime`, and `ZonedDateTime` now
  implement the non-generic `IComparable` interface (explicitly, to
  avoid accidental use)
- Much more information is now exposed via `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`:
   - Added `Aliases` and `CanonicalIdMap` properties, which together provide
     bidirectional mappings between a canonical TZDB ID and its aliases
     ([issue 32][])
   - Added a `WindowsMapping` property (was `WindowsZones` in -rc1), which
     exposes details of the CLDR mapping between TZDB and Windows time zone
     IDs ([issue 82][])
   - Added a `ZoneLocations` property, which exposes the location data from
     `zone.tab` and `iso3166.tab` ([issue 194][])
   - Added a `TzdbVersion` property, which returns the TZDB version string
     (e.g. "2013a")
- Changed the means of constructing a `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`:
   - Added a `Default` property, which provides access to the underlying source
     of TZDB data distributed with Noda Time ([issue 144][])
   - Added `FromStream()`, which can be used to create a source using data in
     the new format produced by `ZoneInfoCompiler` (later renamed to `NodaTime.TzdbCompiler`)
   - Added a `Validate()` method, which allows for optional validation of
     source data (previously, this was performed on every load)
- `LocalDateTime` patterns can now parse times of the form 24:00:00,
  indicating midnight of the following day ([issue 153][])
- Added convenience factory methods to `Instant`:
  `From(Ticks,Milliseconds,Seconds)SinceUnixEpoch` ([issue 142][])
- Added convenience factory methods to `LocalTime`:
  `From(Ticks,Milliseconds,Seconds)SinceMidnight` ([issue 148][])
- Added `LocalDateTime.InUtc()` and `WithOffset()`, convenience conversions
  from `LocalDateTime` to a (UTC) `ZonedDateTime` or `OffsetDateTime`
  ([issue 142][])
- Added `Date` and `TimeOfDay` properties to `ZonedDateTime` and
  `OffsetDateTime`, which provide a `LocalDate` and `LocalTime` directly,
  rather than needing to go via the `LocalDateTime` property ([issue 186][])
- Added `Period.FromMilliseconds()`, obsoleting the misnamed
  `FromMillseconds()` ([issue 149][])
- Added `DateTimeZoneNotFoundException`, which is used in place of the
  .NET `TimeZoneNotFoundException` (which does not exist in the PCL);
  on desktop builds, the new type extends the latter for compatibility
- Added `InvalidNodaDataException`, which is now used to consistently
  report problems reading time zone data; this replaces (inconsistent) use
  of the .NET `InvalidDataException` type, which is also not available in
  the PCL

Newly-obsolete members:

- `DateTimeZoneProviders.Default`, which use should be replaced by
  existing equivalent property `DateTimeZoneProviders.Tzdb`
- `Period.FromMillseconds()`, which was a typo for the newly-introduced
  `Period.FromMilliseconds()`
- All `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource` constructors, which construct a source using
  TZDB data in the older resource-based format; the newer format should be
  provided to the new `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.FromStream()` method instead
  (or, for the embedded resources, the new `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.Default`
  property should be used directly)

API changes for NodaTime.Testing:

- Added `FakeDateTimeZoneSource`, which is exactly what it sounds like
  ([issue 83][])
- Added `MultiTransitionDateTimeZone`, a time zone with multiple
  transitions, complementing the existing `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`
- Added the `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone.Transition` property that returns
  the transition point of the fake zone
- Added an additional constructor to `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone` 
  that allows the time zone ID to be specified

Bug fixes:

- Workaround for a Mono bug where abbreviated genitive month names are provided
  as "1", "2" etc ([issue 202][])
- Fixed parsing issue for cultures where the AM designator is a leading
  substring of the PM designator ([issue 201][])
- Not part of the main release, but `NodaIntervalConverter` now handles values
  embedded in a larger object being deserialized ([issue 191][])
- Behaviour at extremes of time is now improved ([issue 197][]); there's more
  work to come here in 1.2, but this is at least an improvement
- Day-of-week and month names are now parsed by choosing the longest possible
  match, allowing dates to be parsed in cultures where one string is a prefix
  of another ([issue 159][])
- Fixed a minor bug that made the "Asia/Amman" time zone (Jordan) give
  incorrect values or a `NullReferenceException` when asked for a value in 2040
  (and possibly other times). Other time zones should not be affected
  ([issue 174][])
- `LocalDateTime` and `ZonedDateTime` now have non-crashing behaviour when
  initialised via default (parameterless) constructors ([issue 116][])

Other:

- Symbols for the release are now published to SymbolSource. See the
  [installation guide](installation.html) for details of how to debug into Noda
  Time using this
- The version of SHFB used to generate the documentation has changed, along
  with some settings around which members to generate documentation for.
  (Members simply inherited from the BCL aren't documented.)

## 1.0.1, released 2012-11-13 with tzdb 2012i ##

No API changes; this release was purely to fix a problem
with the NodaTime.Testing package.

## 1.0.0, released 2012-11-07 with tzdb 2012i ##

API changes:

- Added the `CalendarSystem.Id` property that returns a unique ID for a
  calendar system, along with the `ForId()` factory method and `Ids` static
  property; `ToString()` now returns the calendar ID rather than the name
- Added support for the `c` custom format specifier for local date values,
  which includes the calendar ID, representing the calendar system
- Added support for the `;` custom format specifier to parse both comma
  and period for fractions of a second; `InstantPattern.ExtendedIsoPattern`,
  `LocalTimePattern.ExtendedIsoPattern`, and
  `LocalDateTimePattern.ExtendedIsoPattern` now accept both as separators
  (issues [140][issue 140] and [141][issue 141])
- Added support for the `r` standard pattern for `LocalDateTime` that includes
  the calendar system
- Renamed the `CreateWithInvariantInfo()` method on the pattern types to
  `CreateWithInvariantCulture()` ([issue 137][])

Other:

- Set specific files to be ignored in ZoneInfoCompiler, so we don't
  need to remove them manually each time

## 1.0.0-rc1, released 2012-11-01 with tzdb 2012h

API changes:

- Renamed `DateTimeZone.GetOffsetFromUtc()` to `DateTimeZone.GetUtcOffset()` to
  match the BCL ([issue 121][])
- Added `LocalDate.FromWeekYearWeekAndDay()` ([issue 120][])
- Text formats can now parse negative values for absolute years ([issue 118][])
- `Tick`, `SecondOfDay` and `MillisecondOfDay` properties removed from
  time-based types ([issue 103][])
- Removed the `NodaCultureInfo` and `NodaFormatInfo` types ([issue 131][] and
  related issues), removed the `FormatInfo` property and `WithFormatInfo()`
  method on pattern types, and changed the culture-specific pattern factory
  methods to take a `CultureInfo` rather than a `NodaFormatInfo`
- Removed `EmptyDateTimeZoneSource`
- Many classes are now `sealed`: `PeriodPattern`, `BclDateTimeZoneProvider`,
  `BclDateTimeZoneSource`, `DateTimeZoneCache`, and `ZoneInterval`, along
  with various exception types and
  `NodaTime.Testing.SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`
- The names of the special resources used by `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`
  (`VersionKey`, etc) are now internal
- Format of the special resource keys has changed; clients using
  custom-built TZDB resources will need to rebuild

Bug fixes:

- Various fixes to `BclDateTimeZone` not working the same way as a BCL
  `TimeZoneInfo` (issues [114][issue 114], [115][issue 115], and
  [122][issue 122])

Other:

- Noda Time assemblies are now signed ([issue 35][])
- Removed support for building under Visual Studio 2008 ([issue 107][])

## 1.0.0-beta2, released 2012-08-04 with tzdb 2012e

API changes:

- Overhaul of how to get a `DateTimeZone` from an ID:
   - `IDateTimeZoneProvider` (SPI for time zones) renamed to
     `IDateTimeZoneSource`, along with similar renaming for the built-in
     sources
   - New interface `IDateTimeZoneProvider` aimed at *callers*, with caching
     assumed
   - New class `DateTimeZoneProviders` with static properties to access the
     built-in providers: TZDB, BCL and default (currently TZDB)
   - Removed various `DateTimeZone` static methods in favour of always going
     via an `IDateTimeZoneProvider` implementation
   - `DateTimeZoneCache` now public and implements `IDateTimeZoneProvider`
- `DateTimeZone` no longer has internal abstract methods, making third-party
  implementations possible ([issue 77][])
- `DateTimeZone` now implements `IEquatable<DateTimeZone>`, and documents what
  it means for time zones to be equal ([issue 81][])
- New core type: `OffsetDateTime` representing a local date/time and an offset
  from UTC, but not full time zone information
- Added a new standard offset pattern of `G`, which is like `g` but using
  "Z" for zero; also available as `OffsetPattern.GeneralInvariantPatternWithZ`
- `Period` and `PeriodBuilder` no longer differentiate between absent and zero
  components (to the extent that they did at all): `Units` has been removed
  from `Period`, period formatting now omits all zero values unconditionally,
  and the `Year` (etc) properties on `PeriodBuilder` are no longer nullable
  ([issue 90][])
- Removed the BCL parsing methods and some of the BCL formatting methods from
  `Instant`, `LocalDate`, `LocalDateTime`, and `Offset` in favour of the
  pattern-based API ([issue 87][])
- `Duration.ToString()` and `Interval.ToString()` now return more descriptive
  text

- Removed `DateTimeZone.GetSystemDefaultOrNull()`; callers should use the
  provider's `GetSystemDefault()` method and (if necessary) catch the
  `TimeZoneNotFoundException` that it can throw ([issue 61][])
- Removed `DateTimeZone.UtcId` and `DateTimeZone.IsFixed` (issues [64][issue 64]
  and [62][issue 62])
- Removed most of the convenience static properties on `Duration` (e.g.
  `Duration.OneStandardDay`) in favour of the existing static methods; removed
  `MinValue` and `MaxValue`, and added `Epsilon` ([issue 70][])
- Removed `Instant.BeginningOfTimeLabel` and `Instant.EndOfTimeLabel`
- `Instant.InIsoUtc` renamed to `InUtc`
- `Instant.UnixEpoch` moved to `NodaConstants.UnixEpoch`;
  `NodaConstants.DateTimeEpochTicks` replaced by `BclEpoch`
- Added `Instant.PlusTicks()`
- `LocalDate.LocalDateTime` property changed to `LocalDate.AtMidnight()` method
  ([issue 56][])
- `LocalTime` now implements `IComparable<LocalTime>` ([issue 51][])
- Added a `LocalTime` constructor taking hours and minutes ([issue 53][])
- Removed "component" properties from `Offset`, and renamed the "total"
  properties to just `Ticks` and `Milliseconds`
- Removed `Offset.Create()` methods (and moved them in slightly different form
  in a new internal `TestObjects` class in `NodaTime.Test`)
- Added `Period.ToDuration()` ([issue 55][]) and `Period.CreateComparer()`
  ([issue 69][])
- `Period.Empty` renamed to `Period.Zero` (as part of [issue 90][])
- `PeriodBuilder` no longer implements `IEquatable<PeriodBuilder>`
  ([issue 91][])
- Removed `SystemClock.SystemNow` in favour of using `SystemClock.Instance.Now`
  if you really have to
- Added `ZonedDateTime.ToOffsetDateTime()`, which returns the `OffsetDateTime`
  equivalent to a `ZonedDateTime`
- Removed the Buddhist `Era` (as there is no Buddhist calendar implementation)

- `NodaTime.Testing.StubClock` renamed to `FakeClock`, and gains an
  auto-advance option (issues [72][issue 72] and [73][issue 73])
- `NodaTime.Testing.TimeZones.SingleTransitionZone` renamed to
  `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`

Bug fixes:

- Many

## 1.0.0-beta1, released 2012-04-12 with tzdb 2012c

- Initial beta release

Commit message:

Updated version history with 1.1.1 release.

www/unstable/userguide/versions.md, after:

---
layout: userguide
title: Version history
category: library
weight: 170
---

User-visible changes from 1.0.0-beta1 onwards. See the
[project repository](http://code.google.com/p/noda-time/source/list) for more
details.

## 1.2 (current default branch)

Major features:

- XML serialization

API changes:

- ...

Newly-obsolete members:

- ...

API changes for NodaTime.Testing:

- ...

Bug fixes:

- ...

Other:

## 1.1.1, released 2013-08-30 with tzdb 2013d

Bug fixes:

- Workaround for a Mono bug where `BclDateTimeZoneSource.GetIds()` would not
  return the local time zone ID, which caused
  `DateTimeZoneProviders.Bcl.GetSystemDefault()` to fail ([issue 235][])
- Fixed a shortcoming in the PCL implementation of
  `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.MapTimeZoneId()` that caused
  `DateTimeZoneProviders.Tzdb.GetSystemDefault()` to fail when the system
  culture was set to something other than English ([issue 221][]).  Under the
  PCL, we can't get the ID of a `TimeZoneInfo`, so we were relying on the
  `StandardName` property - but that (unexpectedly) varies by system locale.
  The fix adds a fallback that attempts to determine which TZDB time zone best
  fits the given `TimeZoneInfo`, by looking at transitions of all zones in the
  current year.

## 1.1.0, released 2013-04-06 with tzdb 2013b

API changes:

- Added `OffsetDateTime.Comparer` and `ZonedDateTime.Comparer`,
  `IComparer<T>` implementations that compare values by either the local
  date/time or the underlying instant
- `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.WindowsZones` renamed to `WindowsMapping`
- `ZoneEqualityComparer` converted to use factory methods rather than
  multiple constructors; some options' names changed

## 1.1.0-rc1, released 2013-03-28 with tzdb 2013b

Major features:

- Noda Time assemblies are now also available in Portable Class Library
  versions (see the [installation instructions](installation.html) for details)
- Noda Time now uses a self-contained (and more compact) format for storing
  TZDB data that is not directly tied to .NET resources; the old format was
  not supportable in the PCL build

API changes:

- The new `DateTimeZone.GetZoneIntervals` methods return a sequence of zone
  intervals which cover a particular interval ([issue 172][])
- A new `ZoneEqualityComparer` class allows time zones to be compared for
  equality with varying degrees of strictness, over a given interval
- `LocalDate`, `LocalTime`, `LocalDateTime`, and `ZonedDateTime` now
  implement the non-generic `IComparable` interface (explicitly, to
  avoid accidental use)
- Much more information is now exposed via `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`:
   - Added `Aliases` and `CanonicalIdMap` properties, which together provide
     bidirectional mappings between a canonical TZDB ID and its aliases
     ([issue 32][])
   - Added a `WindowsMapping` property (was `WindowsZones` in -rc1), which
     exposes details of the CLDR mapping between TZDB and Windows time zone
     IDs ([issue 82][])
   - Added a `ZoneLocations` property, which exposes the location data from
     `zone.tab` and `iso3166.tab` ([issue 194][])
   - Added a `TzdbVersion` property, which returns the TZDB version string
     (e.g. "2013a")
- Changed the means of constructing a `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`:
   - Added a `Default` property, which provides access to the underlying source
     of TZDB data distributed with Noda Time ([issue 144][])
   - Added `FromStream()`, which can be used to create a source using data in
     the new format produced by `ZoneInfoCompiler` (later renamed to `NodaTime.TzdbCompiler`)
   - Added a `Validate()` method, which allows for optional validation of
     source data (previously, this was performed on every load)
- `LocalDateTime` patterns can now parse times of the form 24:00:00,
  indicating midnight of the following day ([issue 153][])
- Added convenience factory methods to `Instant`:
  `From(Ticks,Milliseconds,Seconds)SinceUnixEpoch` ([issue 142][])
- Added convenience factory methods to `LocalTime`:
  `From(Ticks,Milliseconds,Seconds)SinceMidnight` ([issue 148][])
- Added `LocalDateTime.InUtc()` and `WithOffset()`, convenience conversions
  from `LocalDateTime` to a (UTC) `ZonedDateTime` or `OffsetDateTime`
  ([issue 142][])
- Added `Date` and `TimeOfDay` properties to `ZonedDateTime` and
  `OffsetDateTime`, which provide a `LocalDate` and `LocalTime` directly,
  rather than needing to go via the `LocalDateTime` property ([issue 186][])
- Added `Period.FromMilliseconds()`, obsoleting the misnamed
  `FromMillseconds()` ([issue 149][])
- Added `DateTimeZoneNotFoundException`, which is used in place of the
  .NET `TimeZoneNotFoundException` (which does not exist in the PCL);
  on desktop builds, the new type extends the latter for compatibility
- Added `InvalidNodaDataException`, which is now used to consistently
  report problems reading time zone data; this replaces (inconsistent) use
  of the .NET `InvalidDataException` type, which is also not available in
  the PCL

Newly-obsolete members:

- `DateTimeZoneProviders.Default`, which use should be replaced by
  existing equivalent property `DateTimeZoneProviders.Tzdb`
- `Period.FromMillseconds()`, which was a typo for the newly-introduced
  `Period.FromMilliseconds()`
- All `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource` constructors, which construct a source using
  TZDB data in the older resource-based format; the newer format should be
  provided to the new `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.FromStream()` method instead
  (or, for the embedded resources, the new `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource.Default`
  property should be used directly)

API changes for NodaTime.Testing:

- Added `FakeDateTimeZoneSource`, which is exactly what it sounds like
  ([issue 83][])
- Added `MultiTransitionDateTimeZone`, a time zone with multiple
  transitions, complementing the existing `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`
- Added the `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone.Transition` property that returns
  the transition point of the fake zone
- Added an additional constructor to `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone` 
  that allows the time zone ID to be specified

Bug fixes:

- Workaround for a Mono bug where abbreviated genitive month names are provided
  as "1", "2" etc ([issue 202][])
- Fixed parsing issue for cultures where the AM designator is a leading
  substring of the PM designator ([issue 201][])
- Not part of the main release, but `NodaIntervalConverter` now handles values
  embedded in a larger object being deserialized ([issue 191][])
- Behaviour at extremes of time is now improved ([issue 197][]); there's more
  work to come here in 1.2, but this is at least an improvement
- Day-of-week and month names are now parsed by choosing the longest possible
  match, allowing dates to be parsed in cultures where one string is a prefix
  of another ([issue 159][])
- Fixed a minor bug that made the "Asia/Amman" time zone (Jordan) give
  incorrect values or a `NullReferenceException` when asked for a value in 2040
  (and possibly other times). Other time zones should not be affected
  ([issue 174][])
- `LocalDateTime` and `ZonedDateTime` now have non-crashing behaviour when
  initialised via default (parameterless) constructors ([issue 116][])

Other:

- Symbols for the release are now published to SymbolSource. See the
  [installation guide](installation.html) for details of how to debug into Noda
  Time using this
- The version of SHFB used to generate the documentation has changed, along
  with some settings around which members to generate documentation for.
  (Members simply inherited from the BCL aren't documented.)

## 1.0.1, released 2012-11-13 with tzdb 2012i ##

No API changes; this release was purely to fix a problem
with the NodaTime.Testing package.

## 1.0.0, released 2012-11-07 with tzdb 2012i ##

API changes:

- Added the `CalendarSystem.Id` property that returns a unique ID for a
  calendar system, along with the `ForId()` factory method and `Ids` static
  property; `ToString()` now returns the calendar ID rather than the name
- Added support for the `c` custom format specifier for local date values,
  which includes the calendar ID, representing the calendar system
- Added support for the `;` custom format specifier to parse both comma
  and period for fractions of a second; `InstantPattern.ExtendedIsoPattern`,
  `LocalTimePattern.ExtendedIsoPattern`, and
  `LocalDateTimePattern.ExtendedIsoPattern` now accept both as separators
  (issues [140][issue 140] and [141][issue 141])
- Added support for the `r` standard pattern for `LocalDateTime` that includes
  the calendar system
- Renamed the `CreateWithInvariantInfo()` method on the pattern types to
  `CreateWithInvariantCulture()` ([issue 137][])

Other:

- Set specific files to be ignored in ZoneInfoCompiler, so we don't
  need to remove them manually each time

## 1.0.0-rc1, released 2012-11-01 with tzdb 2012h

API changes:

- Renamed `DateTimeZone.GetOffsetFromUtc()` to `DateTimeZone.GetUtcOffset()` to
  match the BCL ([issue 121][])
- Added `LocalDate.FromWeekYearWeekAndDay()` ([issue 120][])
- Text formats can now parse negative values for absolute years ([issue 118][])
- `Tick`, `SecondOfDay` and `MillisecondOfDay` properties removed from
  time-based types ([issue 103][])
- Removed the `NodaCultureInfo` and `NodaFormatInfo` types ([issue 131][] and
  related issues), removed the `FormatInfo` property and `WithFormatInfo()`
  method on pattern types, and changed the culture-specific pattern factory
  methods to take a `CultureInfo` rather than a `NodaFormatInfo`
- Removed `EmptyDateTimeZoneSource`
- Many classes are now `sealed`: `PeriodPattern`, `BclDateTimeZoneProvider`,
  `BclDateTimeZoneSource`, `DateTimeZoneCache`, and `ZoneInterval`, along
  with various exception types and
  `NodaTime.Testing.SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`
- The names of the special resources used by `TzdbDateTimeZoneSource`
  (`VersionKey`, etc) are now internal
- Format of the special resource keys has changed; clients using
  custom-built TZDB resources will need to rebuild

Bug fixes:

- Various fixes to `BclDateTimeZone` not working the same way as a BCL
  `TimeZoneInfo` (issues [114][issue 114], [115][issue 115], and
  [122][issue 122])

Other:

- Noda Time assemblies are now signed ([issue 35][])
- Removed support for building under Visual Studio 2008 ([issue 107][])

## 1.0.0-beta2, released 2012-08-04 with tzdb 2012e

API changes:

- Overhaul of how to get a `DateTimeZone` from an ID:
   - `IDateTimeZoneProvider` (SPI for time zones) renamed to
     `IDateTimeZoneSource`, along with similar renaming for the built-in
     sources
   - New interface `IDateTimeZoneProvider` aimed at *callers*, with caching
     assumed
   - New class `DateTimeZoneProviders` with static properties to access the
     built-in providers: TZDB, BCL and default (currently TZDB)
   - Removed various `DateTimeZone` static methods in favour of always going
     via an `IDateTimeZoneProvider` implementation
   - `DateTimeZoneCache` now public and implements `IDateTimeZoneProvider`
- `DateTimeZone` no longer has internal abstract methods, making third-party
  implementations possible ([issue 77][])
- `DateTimeZone` now implements `IEquatable<DateTimeZone>`, and documents what
  it means for time zones to be equal ([issue 81][])
- New core type: `OffsetDateTime` representing a local date/time and an offset
  from UTC, but not full time zone information
- Added a new standard offset pattern of `G`, which is like `g` but using
  "Z" for zero; also available as `OffsetPattern.GeneralInvariantPatternWithZ`
- `Period` and `PeriodBuilder` no longer differentiate between absent and zero
  components (to the extent that they did at all): `Units` has been removed
  from `Period`, period formatting now omits all zero values unconditionally,
  and the `Year` (etc) properties on `PeriodBuilder` are no longer nullable
  ([issue 90][])
- Removed the BCL parsing methods and some of the BCL formatting methods from
  `Instant`, `LocalDate`, `LocalDateTime`, and `Offset` in favour of the
  pattern-based API ([issue 87][])
- `Duration.ToString()` and `Interval.ToString()` now return more descriptive
  text

- Removed `DateTimeZone.GetSystemDefaultOrNull()`; callers should use the
  provider's `GetSystemDefault()` method and (if necessary) catch the
  `TimeZoneNotFoundException` that it can throw ([issue 61][])
- Removed `DateTimeZone.UtcId` and `DateTimeZone.IsFixed` (issues [64][issue 64]
  and [62][issue 62])
- Removed most of the convenience static properties on `Duration` (e.g.
  `Duration.OneStandardDay`) in favour of the existing static methods; removed
  `MinValue` and `MaxValue`, and added `Epsilon` ([issue 70][])
- Removed `Instant.BeginningOfTimeLabel` and `Instant.EndOfTimeLabel`
- `Instant.InIsoUtc` renamed to `InUtc`
- `Instant.UnixEpoch` moved to `NodaConstants.UnixEpoch`;
  `NodaConstants.DateTimeEpochTicks` replaced by `BclEpoch`
- Added `Instant.PlusTicks()`
- `LocalDate.LocalDateTime` property changed to `LocalDate.AtMidnight()` method
  ([issue 56][])
- `LocalTime` now implements `IComparable<LocalTime>` ([issue 51][])
- Added a `LocalTime` constructor taking hours and minutes ([issue 53][])
- Removed "component" properties from `Offset`, and renamed the "total"
  properties to just `Ticks` and `Milliseconds`
- Removed `Offset.Create()` methods (and moved them in slightly different form
  in a new internal `TestObjects` class in `NodaTime.Test`)
- Added `Period.ToDuration()` ([issue 55][]) and `Period.CreateComparer()`
  ([issue 69][])
- `Period.Empty` renamed to `Period.Zero` (as part of [issue 90][])
- `PeriodBuilder` no longer implements `IEquatable<PeriodBuilder>`
  ([issue 91][])
- Removed `SystemClock.SystemNow` in favour of using `SystemClock.Instance.Now`
  if you really have to
- Added `ZonedDateTime.ToOffsetDateTime()`, which returns the `OffsetDateTime`
  equivalent to a `ZonedDateTime`
- Removed the Buddhist `Era` (as there is no Buddhist calendar implementation)

- `NodaTime.Testing.StubClock` renamed to `FakeClock`, and gains an
  auto-advance option (issues [72][issue 72] and [73][issue 73])
- `NodaTime.Testing.TimeZones.SingleTransitionZone` renamed to
  `SingleTransitionDateTimeZone`

Bug fixes:

- Many

## 1.0.0-beta1, released 2012-04-12 with tzdb 2012c

- Initial beta release
